This is true in personal finance, where you’re told to have a six-month
emergency fund and save 10% of your salary
Two topics impact everyone, whether you are interested in them or not: health
and money.
Physics isn’t controversial. It’s guided by laws. Finance is different.
It’s guided by people’s behaviors. And how I behave might make sense to me
but look crazy to you.
I love Voltaire’s observation that “History never repeats itself; man always
does.” It applies so well to how we behave with money.

Everyone has their own unique experience with how the world works. And what
you’ve experienced is more compelling than what you learn second-hand. So all
of us—you, me, everyone—go through life anchored to a set of views about how
money works that vary wildly from person to person. What seems crazy to you
might make sense to me.

Your personal experiences with money make up maybe 0.00000001% of what’s
happened in the world, but maybe 80% of how you think the world works. So
equally smart people can disagree about how and why recessions happen, how
you should invest your money, what you should prioritize, how much risk you
should take, and so on

The challenge for us is that no amount of studying or open-mindedness can
genuinely recreate the power of fear and uncertainty.

Spreadsheets can model the historic frequency of big stock market declines. But
they can’t model the feeling of coming home, looking at your kids, and
wondering if you’ve made a mistake that will impact their lives. Studying
history makes you feel like you understand something. But until you’ve lived
through it and personally felt its consequences, you may not understand it
enough to change your behavior.

We all think we know how the world works. But we’ve all only experienced a
tiny sliver of it.
The economists wrote: “Our findings suggest that individual investors’
willingness to bear risk depends on personal history.”
Not intelligence, or education, or sophistication. Just the dumb luck of when and
where you were born.

But every financial decision a person makes, makes sense to them in that
moment and checks the boxes they need to check. They tell themselves a story
about what they’re doing and why they’re doing it, and that story has been
shaped by their own unique experiences.

You don’t have to agree with this reasoning. Buying lotto tickets when you’re
broke is still a bad idea. But I can kind of understand why lotto ticket sales
persist.
And that idea—“What you’re doing seems crazy but I kind of understand why
you’re doing it.”—uncovers the root of many of our financial decisions.

It should surprise no one that many of us are bad at saving and investing for
retirement. We’re not crazy. We’re all just newbies.

Luck and risk are both the reality that every outcome in life is guided by forces
other than individual effort. They are so similar that you can’t believe in one
without equally respecting the other. They both happen because the world is too
complex to allow 100% of your actions to dictate 100% of your outcomes. 

They are driven by the same thing: You are one person in a game with seven billion
other people and infinite moving parts. The accidental impact of actions outside
of your control can be more consequential than the ones you consciously take.

For every Bill Gates there is a Kent Evans who was just as skilled
and driven but ended up on the other side of life roulette.

You’ll get closer to actionable takeaways by looking for broad patterns of
success and failure. The more common the pattern, the more applicable it might
be to your life. Trying to emulate Warren Buffett’s investment success is hard,
because his results are so extreme that the role of luck in his lifetime
performance is very likely high, and luck isn’t something you can reliably
emulate. But realizing, as we’ll see in chapter 7, that people who have control
over their time tend to be happier in life is a broad and common enough
observation that you can do something with it.

Failure can be a lousy teacher, because it seduces smart people into thinking
their decisions were terrible when sometimes they just reflect the unforgiving
realities of risk. The trick when dealing with failure is arranging your financial
realities of risk. The trick when dealing with failure is arranging your financial
life in a way that a bad investment here and a missed financial goal there won’t
wipe you out so you can keep playing until the odds fall in your favor.

1. The hardest financial skill is getting the goalpost to stop moving.

But it’s one of the most important. If expectations rise with results there is no
logic in striving for more because you’ll feel the same after putting in extra
effort. It gets dangerous when the taste of having more—more money, more
power, more prestige—increases ambition faster than satisfaction. In that case
one step forward pushes the goalpost two steps ahead. You feel as if you’re
falling behind, and the only way to catch up is to take greater and greater
amounts of risk.

3. “Enough” is not too little.
The idea of having “enough” might look like conservatism, leaving opportunity
and potential on the table.
I don’t think that’s right.
“Enough” is realizing that the opposite—an insatiable appetite for more—will
push you to the point of regret.